
Holy Bible, Today's New International Version
®
TNIV
®
Copyright 2001, 2005 by International Bible Society
®
All rights reserved worldwide.
The TNIV
®
text may be quoted in any form (wri
tten, visual, electronic or audio) up
to and inclusive of five hundred (500)
verses without the express written
permission of the publisher, providing the
verses quoted do not amount to a
complete book of the Bible
nor do the verses quoted account for more than 25
percent (25%) or more of the total text
of the work in which they are quoted..
Permission requests that exceed the abov
e guildlines must be directed to, and
approved in writing by International Bible Society.
Notice of copyright must appear on the ti
tle or copyright page of the work as
follows:
Scripture taken from the Holy Bible, Today's New International
®
Version
TNIV
®
. Copyright 2001, 2005 by International Bible Society
®
. Used by
permission of International Bible Society
®
. All rights reserved worldwide.
"TNIV" and "Today's New Internat
ional Version" are trademarks
registered in the United States Patent and Trademark Office by
International Bible Society
®
.
When quotations from the TNIV
®
are used in non-saleable media, such as church
bulletins, orders of service, posters, tran
sparencies or similar media, a complete
copyright notice is not requ
ired, but the initials (TNIV
®
) must appear at the end of
each quotations.
These Scriptures have been made available
on the internet for your personal use
only. Any other use including, but not limite
d to, copying or re-posting the Scripture
or this PDF on the internet is prohibited
. These Scriptures may not be altered or
modified in any form but must remain in
their original cont
ext. Please see the
Terms of Use Statement
for more information.
International Bible Society
1820 Jet Stream Drive
Colorado Springs, CO 80921-3696
www.IBS.org | www.TNIV.info
A Word to the Reader
Today’s New International Version (TNIV) is
a revision of the New International
Version (NIV). Among the many English vers
ions of the Bible that appeared in the
twentieth century, the NIV (1973, 1978, 1984)
has gained the widest readership in
all parts of the English-speaking world. It
was a completely new translation made
by over a hundred scholars working directly from the best available Hebrew,
Aramaic and Greek texts. The fact that part
icipants from the United States, Great
Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand worked together gave the project its
international scope. That they were from many denominations—including
Anglican, Assemblies of God, Baptist, Br
ethren, Christian Reformed, Church of
Christ, Evangelical Covenant, Evangelic
al Free, Lutheran, Mennonite, Methodist,
Nazarene, Presbyterian, Wesleyan and o
ther churches—helped to safeguard the
translation from sectarian bias. Responsibility for the NIV text, and now also for the
text of the TNIV, is held by
a self-governing body, the
Committee on Bible
Translation
(CBT), composed of biblical scholars from colleges, universities and
seminaries. During the revision process, many of the original members of CBT have
been replaced by other scholars owing to
retirement and other causes, but a similar
geographical and denominational mix has been maintained.
From the beginning the translators have been united in their commitment to the
authority and infallibility of the Bible as God’s Word in written form. For them, the
Bible contains the divine answer to the deepest needs of humanity, sheds unique
light on our path in a dark world and sets
forth the way to our eternal well-being.
Out of this deep conviction, the Committ
ee has held to certain goals for the NIV
and for the present revision: that it would be an accurate translation and one that
would have clarity and literary quality and so prove suitable for public and private
reading, teaching, preaching, memorizi
ng and liturgical use. The Committee has
also sought to preserve a measure of co
ntinuity with the long tradition of
translating the Scriptures into English.
There is a sense in which the work of
translating the Bible is never finished. This very fact has prompted the Committee
to engage in an ongoing review of the te
xt of the NIV with the assistance of many
other scholars. The chief goal of this review
has always been to bring the text of the
NIV abreast of contemporary bibl
ical scholarship and of sh
ifts in English idiom and
usage. Already in 1978 and again in 1984 var
ious corrections and revisions to the
NIV text were made. In the TNIV the Commi
ttee offers to the reading public the
latest fruits of its review.
The first concern of the translators has continued to be the accuracy of the
translation and its faithfulness to the intend
ed meaning of the biblical writers. This
has moved the translators to go beyond a formal word-for-word rendering of the
original texts. Because thought patterns
and syntax differ from language to
language, accurate communication of the
meaning of the biblical authors demands
constant regard for varied contextual uses
of words and idioms and for frequent
modifications in sentence structures. To
achieve clarity the translators have
sometimes supplied words not in the original
texts but required by the context. In a
few instances, where some uncertainty about such material remained, it is enclosed
in corner brackets. As an aid to the read
er, italicized sectional headings have been
inserted. They are not to be regarded as
part of the biblic
al text and are not
intended for oral reading. It is the Co
mmittee’s hope that these headings may prove
more helpful to the reader than the t
raditional chapter divisions (which were
introduced in the thirteenth century).
For the Old Testament the standard Hebrew text, the Masoretic Text as published
in the latest editions of Biblia Hebraica
, has been used throughout. The Masoretic
Text tradition contains marginal notations that offer variant readings. These have
sometimes been followed instead of the text
itself. Because such instances involve
variants within the Masoretic tradition, the
y have not been indicated in the textual
notes. In a few cases, words in the basic consonantal text have been divided
differently than in the Masoretic Text. Such cases are usually indicated in the
textual footnotes. The Dead Sea Scrolls
contain biblical texts that represent an
earlier stage of the transmission of the He
brew text. They have been consulted, as
have been the Samaritan Pentateuch and the
ancient scribal traditions concerning
deliberate textual changes. The translators also consulted the more important early
versions— the Greek Septuagint, Aquila
, Symmachus and Theodotion, the Latin
Vulgate, the Syriac Peshitta, the Aramaic
Targums, and for the Psalms the Juxta
Hebraica of Jerome. Readings from the Dead
Sea Scrolls, the scribal traditions and
these versions were occasionally follo
wed where the Masoretic Text seemed
doubtful and where accepted principles of textual criticism showed that one or
more of these textual witnesses appeared to
provide the correct reading. In rare
cases, the translators have emended the
Hebrew text where it appears to have
become corrupted at an even earlier stag
e of its transmission. These departures
from the Masoretic Text are also indicate
d in the textual footnotes. Sometimes the
vowel indicators (which are later additions to the basic consonantal text) found in
the Masoretic Text did not, in the judgment
of the translators, represent the correct
vowels for the original text. Accordingly, some words have been read with a
different set of vowels. These instances are
usually not indicated in the footnotes.
The Greek text used in translating the New Testament has been an eclectic one,
based on the latest editions of the Nest
le-Aland/United Bible Societies’ Greek New
Testament. The translators have made the
ir choices among the variant readings in
accordance with widely accepted principles
of New Testament textual criticism.
Footnotes call attention to pla
ces where uncertainty remains.

